inst/app/www/about.md, before:

### Overview

The aim of this tool is to help researchers select and assess potential field sites for studies on ecology, public health, anthropology, and more, in a quantitative way. Often, researchers aim to have field sites that exist along a gradient of different land use types and characteristics. This tool allows researchers to analyze the landcover characteristics of a list of sites, and see where potential sites fall along a gradient of other potential sites.  

There are two main ways to use this app:
1. Generate a list of potential sites within a bounding box and analyze the land cover characteristics for each site based on an uploaded raster.
2. Check if previously selected field sites are biased by comparing land cover characteristics to other potential sites in the same area.

By using this tool, researchers may uncover previously unconsidered field sites as well as ensure that their chosen sites exist along a land cover gradient relevant to their question of interest.

#### Input Raster Sources

You can use the default land cover raster (Copernicus Dynamic Land Cover 100m) or upload a landcover raster for your region of interest in *GeoTIFF* format. The app currently can take three types of categorical land-use/landcover data:
1. [ESA WorldCover Viewer](https://viewer.esa-worldcover.org/worldcover/) 
2. [Dynamic World](https://dynamicworld.app/)
3. [Copernicus Dynamic Land Cover](https://lcviewer.vito.be/)

Please visit the above sites to download a raster for your region of interest. If your region covers multiple tiles, please merge tiles into one file prior to uploading. Please ensure the raster CRS is WGS 84, and the values for any land cover type are in one layer following the numeric codes for the above products. 

The app can also support rasters with continuous values, such as for temperature or NDVI. For these inputs, please ensure the input raster has only one numeric layer. 

The following Google Earth Engine scripts can also be used to download raster data for your area of interest (link to github).

It is recommended to use high-resolution products (< 100m) due to the scale of the analysis.  

#### Instructions
##### Step 1
1. Select the box icon located in the upper left-hand corner of the map. Use this to select your potential study site area. You may also manually enter the coordinates of your bounding box, or upload a shapefile. Shapefiles must be in GeoJSON format and contain one polygon. 
2. If you are uploading your own raster data, please head to one of the websites to download a landcover raster for your area. If your area encompasses multiple tiles, please merge before uploading. You may use the bounding box coordinates from the previous step to select the same region of interest, making sure to add an appropriately sized buffer around the area for the land cover analysis. 
3. Select the product type for your raster.
4. Press **go**. The raster data will be downloaded or uploaded and then displayed on the map when finished.  If the raster uploads correctly, a plot of your raster will display. (Note: the current upload size limit is 5MB, please ensure files are smaller than this. If you need to upload larger files, please download the app from GitHub and run locally.)
5. If you have selected the default raster source, you have the option to export the raster as a GeoTiff in this step. 


##### Step 2
1. Select either **random** sites or **village** sites. Village sites will find all of the towns/villages/cities in the selected area using OpenStreetMap, and random sites will select sites based on simple random sampling. (Note: if you select a very large area for **village** sites, the request may time out.)
2. For random sites, you must specify the number of sites required. Major water bodies will be avoided, and points will be further from cities and roads than the distance provided.
3. For city sites, please specify a max population limit. Please note that the population data is often missing and may not correctly filter out sites. 
4. If you already have potential sites, please upload a list of the sites in CSV format. The CSV should contain a column labeled **site**, which has the site name, and columns with **latitude** and **longitude** in decimal degrees.
5. Press **go**. The sites according to your specifications will be displayed on the map.
6. You have option to export the list of sites in this step. 


##### Step 3
1. Input the distance from the center of each potential site you would like the landcover data analyzed from in meters. This distance is the distance from the point to each edge of the raster on all four sides, so a distances of 1000 meters (1km) would lead to an area of analysis of 4 km<sup>2</sup>.
2. Press **go**. The calculations may take a while to run. The plots and data will be displayed in the respective tabs when finished. Press **save file** to export. 
3. Use the drop down menu to change the measure displayed. For landcover rasters there are three options:
  - Proportion: the proportion covered by land cover category in the area analyzed
  - Mean Patch Area: the mean patch size for the land cover category in the area analyzed. A larger mean patch area indicates larger and more contiguous patches of that land cover type. 
  - Total Area (m<sup>2</sup>): area covered by land cover category in the area analyzed
4. The comparison plot and table shows the values of your input sites relative to the other sites analyzed. Hover over each point to find the name of the site.

#### Requests/issues?
Please log on github.

Commit message:

update about text and forbid selection of points outside of roi

inst/app/www/about.md, after:

### Overview

The aim of this tool is to help researchers select and assess potential field sites for studies on ecology, public health, anthropology, and more, in a quantitative way. Often, researchers aim to have field sites that exist along a gradient of different land use types and characteristics. This tool allows researchers to analyze the landcover characteristics of a list of sites, and see where potential sites fall along a gradient of other potential sites.  

There are two main ways to use this app:
1. Generate a list of potential sites within a bounding box and analyze the land cover characteristics for each site based on an uploaded raster.
2. Check if previously selected field sites are biased by comparing land cover characteristics to other potential sites in the same area.

By using this tool, researchers may uncover previously unconsidered field sites as well as ensure that their chosen sites exist along a land cover gradient relevant to their question of interest.

#### Input Raster Sources

You can use the default rasters or upload a raster for your region of interest in *GeoTIFF* format.

Some possible options for land cover data:
1. [ESA WorldCover Viewer](https://viewer.esa-worldcover.org/worldcover/) 
2. [Dynamic World](https://dynamicworld.app/)
3. [Copernicus Dynamic Land Cover](https://lcviewer.vito.be/)

Please visit the above sites to download a raster for your region of interest. If your region covers multiple tiles, please merge tiles into one file prior to uploading. Please ensure the raster CRS is WGS 84, and the values for any land cover type are in one layer following the numeric codes for the above products. 

If you are uploading your own raster, PLEASE USE GOOGLE CHROME or use the app locally. Other browsers do not support GeoTiffs.  

It is recommended to use high-resolution products (< 100m) due to the scale of the analysis.  

#### Instructions
##### Step 1
1. Select the box icon located in the upper left-hand corner of the map. Use this to select your potential study site area. You may also manually enter the coordinates of your bounding box, or upload a shapefile. Shapefiles must be in GeoJSON format and contain one polygon. 
2. If you are uploading your own raster data, please head to one of the websites to download a land cover raster for your area. If your area encompasses multiple tiles, please merge before uploading. You may use the bounding box coordinates from the previous step to select the same region of interest, making sure to add an appropriately sized buffer around the area for the land cover analysis. 
3. Press **go**. The raster data will be downloaded or uploaded and then displayed on the map when finished.  If the raster uploads correctly, a plot of your raster will display. (Note: the current upload size limit is 5MB, please ensure files are smaller than this. If you need to upload larger files, please download the app from GitHub and run locally.)
4. If you have selected one of the default rasters, you have the option to export the raster as a GeoTiff in this step. 


##### Step 2
1. Select either **random** sites or **village** sites. Village sites will find all of the towns/villages/cities in the selected area using OpenStreetMap, and random sites will select sites based on simple random sampling. (Note: if you select a very large area for **village** sites, the request may time out.)
2. For random sites, you must specify the number of sites required. Major water bodies will be avoided, and points will be further from cities and roads than the distance provided.
3. For city sites, please specify a max population limit. Please note that the population data is often missing and may not correctly filter out sites. 
4. If you already have potential sites, please upload a list of the sites in CSV format. The CSV should contain a column labeled **site**, which has the site name, and columns with **latitude** and **longitude** in decimal degrees. Additionally, you select points on the map by toggling that option and clicking on the map.
5. Press **go**. The sites according to your specifications will be displayed on the map.
6. You have option to export the list of sites in this step. 


##### Step 3
1. Input the distance from the center of each potential site you would like the land cover data analyzed from in meters. This distance is the distance from the point to each edge of the raster on all four sides, so a distances of 1000 meters (1km) would lead to an area of analysis of 4 km<sup>2</sup>.
2. Press **go**. The calculations may take a while to run. The plots and data will be displayed in the respective tabs when finished. Press **save file** to export. 
3. Use the drop down menu to change the measure displayed. For landcover rasters there are three options:
  - Proportion: the proportion covered by land cover category in the area analyzed
  - Mean Patch Area: the mean patch size for the land cover category in the area analyzed. A larger mean patch area indicates larger and more contiguous patches of that land cover type. 
  - Total Area (m<sup>2</sup>): area covered by land cover category in the area analyzed
4. The comparison plot and table shows the values of your input sites relative to the other sites analyzed. Hover over each point to find the name of the site.

#### Requests/issues?
Please log on github: https://github.com/BioDivHealth/sitetool/issues
